# EverDungeon

## The Game

EverDungeon is a classic 3D dungeon crawler on the surface, and a deep character and world simulation behind the scenes. The game has the spirit of A Bard's Tale, meets Skyrim, meets Dwarf Fortress, meets Dragon Quest Builders, meets Anno.

The game is web published and online. It is a single player adventure/exploration game with RPG/City Builder mechanics and MMO economics.

The perspective is first-person with hands/tools models for the player. There are deep RPG systems for character development and itemization. Resource collection, distribution and maintainance are critical to success. Some crafting is performed by the player, but most is performed by NPCs when the player is sufficiently aligned with the NPC's faction. Crafting design is intricate and multilayered. NPCs take time to craft and often require subcomponents crafted by other NPCs.

The world can be modified in some areas (Cavern). The player can build tunnels and rooms (including vertically) This is not voxel based - the world just adds geometry in empty space as it expands. Various furnatiure, tools and items can be crafted and placed to decorate rooms. Decorated rooms can then have a friendly NPC encouraged to move in. Once some minimum number of NPCs occupy adjacent rooms, new NPCs will automatically start spawing at some odd intervals to continue occupying the "town", as long as there are rooms ready for them. They will also take up occupations if appropriate rooms are provided.

NPCs behave according to simple wants/likes/dislikes and behavior is focused on working and surviving - intra-NPC conflict is not a mechanic. NPCs only need to be "fulfilled" to remain and work. If they are unfulfilled (lack of food, health, sleep, work or entertainment) then they will leave or die, otherwise they will work (if they can find a job they like) at a capacity realtive to their fulfillment. NPC likes and dislikes are categories that are related to one or more jobs or roles (not the job or role itself), so each NPC will have some mix of things it should and shouldn't want to do (and therefore be fulfilled, or not, by and therefore do at relative capacity). If a job must be done (the room exists) then a Jobless NPC will take that job even if they don't like it - this will impact their fulfillment and output rate/quality. Fix this situation would require both another NPC that likes this job and a new room with a job this NPC would like. If both become available, the NPCs will adjust their jobs automatically.

Storage rooms serve as nodes that can be used by the player to create trade routes and then NPCs will work carrying goods (cart/wagon required) based on the warehouse manifests configured by the player. Rails and little trains can be built and operated by NPCs as well.

Combat sections will not be editable by the player - the surface types do not allow modification or placing objects (expect for items with specific functionality and placement locations). This will be where resources are discovered and collected. Once paths are cleared to resources, flags can be placed to lead allied NPCs to harvest locations.
 
## Visual Design

EverDungeon is an old-school 3D game with simple low-poly objects and basic textures and shaders. It does have nice lighting since that comes fairly cheap technically for this kind of game.

All necessary models and textures are generated by AI during development.

The entire game takes place underground so we just need textures that highlight the shape of the rooms and tunnels using the lighting.

Characters and objects are also AI generated models with simplistic texturing. Blocky-looking characters are preferred.

Everything uses an old-school, dark, dungeon asthetic. The UI is high visibility with large, clear text and large icons. The expected player base will have old eyes and big monitors.

## World Design

The game world is proceedural and infinitely generating. An initial cave system of chunks (groups of cube geometry, not voxels) randomly generates with the player in the center. As the player explores, more cave chunks are generated until at a certain distance the first dungeon is spawned and reserves some required number of chunks forward in the world. These chunks are made of the materials a player cannot build on. Once far enough away from another dungeon, a new dungeon will spawn. The difficulty and size of each dungeon increases as the radius from the start area increases.

NPCs will gain skill at any job they do so it is possible to have long-working NPCs to produce ever stronger equipment to keep up with the difficulty of new dungeons. Equipment enchanting, potions and magic will become critical to keep up with dungeon difficulty at great distances from start.

Materials can begin to be reused with prefixes to continue to generate stronger resources for contiously better recipies as NPC skill rises.

Players should be able to find "exploitable" combinations of creating enchanted equipment and potions and giving them to NPCs to boost their capabilities. The game does not engineer for these things, but neither does it actively work to prevent them from emerging.

### Multiplayer Worlds

Each player exists in their own unique world but cross-world communication and trade systems are part of the game. Carrying messages is a skill an NPC can have, as well as Trader. These NPCs can use the "Pixie Network" to "travel" to other worlds. Mechanically the NPC is simply unloaded, some time passes, then the resource trades and updates are applied to all players involved and the NPC respawns and continues its business.

A Pixie NPC can also be found and befriended (aligned) to provide direct access to the cross-world trading network (there is still a delay in the actual trade occuring, so regular trader NPCs are never useless, they take a little longer but you can have many active whereas a pixie can only work one transaction at a time).

## Itemization

All items and equipment are craftable and destructable into components or resources. There are many types of resource and many levels of crafting components to get to usable items. All items can be placed in the world and some held items are usable by the player. 

Items can be enchanted up to their Enchantment Capacity which is based on the materials used in, and quality of, their construction. Exceeding a material's enchantment capacity destroys the item and wastes the enchantment materials.

## Skills and Crafting

The player learns all crafting and combat skills and can then teach any skill they know to a friendly NPC with open skill slots (each NPC has a limited number of skill slots that can vary by species and individual stats). When provided the correct Room type and/or equipment or other requirement, the NPC will use the skill automatically.

Once an NPC takes over a crafting duty, the player need only see that they are kept in supplies and given priorities on what to create. Excessive items should be sold or traded outside of the dungeon (specific NPC jobs can provide this service).

New skills are acquired in exploration zones through discovering and reading skill books, by rescuing an NPC who teaches the player an new skill (which can then be taught to other NPCs) or by discovering a new workshop Room and figuring out how to make something in it (often while facing a mob spawner).

## NPCs and Mobs

NPCs are critical to the gameplay and can be found/rescued in exploration areas. Once a "town" is established, new NPCs will join automatically from time to time. NPCs are made up of multiple underground-dwelling races including goblins, gnolls, kobolds, gnomes, dwarves, root elves and dark elves.

Factions serve as the main grouping for NPCs, including an "Unaligned" faction for wandering nomad style NPCs. Players have a rating with each faction they meet. This rating may intitially be set based on how the player encounters the NPC, their respective attribute values, and the location where the NPC is found. In other cases the faction may have a set starting value in ally first meetings.

Any of the races can be friendly or hostile, depending on their factions. Skin color and equipment typically make various factions distinguishable, but not always. The "Interact" input (F key or A button) will "question" an NPC for a response that indicates their hostility if used from an appropriate distance and in a neutral stancce. A hostile NPC will just attack if the player questions while holding a weapon or in some other combat-ready position. Otherwise the player gets an indication of the difficulty level of the enemy before they get close enough to force aggro. 

Friendly NPCs will respond with some reaction that indicates how you can get them to follow you back to one of your towns. They are essentially quest givers when you first meet them and will have a fetch, kill, guard, or guide quest (or multiple quests) that you must complete for them to follow you to a town. The more skillful and high stat NPCs have longer harder quests. The text of a quest line indicates how many steps remain even if they are not explicity stated. The player does not need to successfully complete all steps - 60% success is typically sufficient, but success rate does impact faction rating.

Other creatures are either neutral or hostile. These do not respond to being questioned. They either attack or do not when you get close enough.  Some may ignore you mostly unless you annoy or scare them or threaten their homes (rats and spiders for example). Others are always instantly hostile (skeletons and other undead for example). Some can change depending on who controls them such as golems and automotons. 

## Character Builds

Characters, both the player and NPCs, have Statistics, Attributes and Skills. 

## Statistics

The Statistics are "Wounding", "Fatigue" and "Distraction" and are tracked with gradient bars called Tracks. 

Tracks have one or more Markers that identify key points along the Track. Each of these Tracks has a Neutral Marker and a Tolerance Marker. 

The Neutral Marker is the point where the character has zero of that Statistic value. This marker is typically near the left side of the Track. As a Track fills to the right of this marker, the statistic increases. To the left, the statistic is suppressed. 

Once the Track fills to the right beyond the Tolerance Marker, the statistic causes an increasingly negative effect, to the point of possible incapacitation (or even death).

### Wounding

Wounding accumulates from taking damage. Getting hit by a weapon or spell, or contacting dangerous items in the environment will all cause some fixed amount and type of damage according to the source. This damage is then translated into wounding according to resistances to the source, armor (when involved), and character attribute values.

As wounding increased to and beyond tolerance, the character's effectiveness at further action diminishes rapidly (all damage or crafting output takes a penalty modifier) and fatigue steadily increases (a bleeding/wounding effect). If wounding reaches the end of the track, the character falls unconsious and will die without intervention (triggered magic/items or help from an NPC). 

### Fatigue

All actions generate some amount of fatigue, even walking, albiet very little. Running, jumping and simming generates fatigue much faster. Swinging a heavy sword generates more fatigue than a dagger, and a two-hand mace is even more fatiguing to wield. Wearing heavy armor makes all action cost more fatigue (unless you get skilled at wearing it).

As a character becomes fatigued beyond tolerance, their actions take a penalty similar to being wounded, but more severe - they also can no longer run or swim and cannot jump as high. If the track reaches the end, the character falls unconscious and must lay prone for a long time to recover before they can act again.

Standing still reduces gained fatigue, sitting reduces it faster, lying down faster yet, and sleeping removes it entirely after a duration appropriate to the amount of fatigue. Sleeping without preparing a safe camp, with fire, protection and traps, is likely to cause attack which interrupts the sleep and puts the player in combat.

Spell casting also induces fatigue in addition to movement and combat. Attribute scores and skill levels are critical to casting spells without getting worn out too quickly, in addition to making them effective (or using them at all). A fatigued character (one beyond the tolerance marker) cannot cast or maintain spells.

### Distraction

Accuracy of physical attacks and the ability to complete casting of a spell (and casting time in general) are directly impacted by the level of Distraction. Executing certain skills can increase distraction dramatically, and maintaining some ongoing spells can continously add to distraction over time. Concentration is the key skill for mitigating the effects of distration and increasing tolerance. 

Distraction fades rapidly after no new distraction is added for a short time (also highly influenced by concentration).

A distracted character cannot execute skills or cast spells and any other further actions they can execute take a severe effectiveness penalty until the distration level drops.

## Attributes

The Attributes are "Endurance", "Stamina", "Concentration", "Strength", "Aglilty", "Dexterity", "Intelligence", "Wisdom", "Constitution", "Diplomacy", "Eloquence", and "Cunning".

### Endurance

Endurance determines how much wounding can be tolerated and the rate at which wounding occurs from damage. Stamina determines fatigue limits and accumulation rates. Concentration determines distration limits and accumulation rates.

### Strength

Strength impacts physical combat and provides a damage bonus when weilding impact weapons (e.g. hammers, maces, axes, etc.) or attacking with fists. The height of jumping and Character carrying and hauling capacity are set by Strength as well. Some weapons and armor may have a minimum strength requirement to use them. There may also be a minimum Strength requirement for some world interactions such as lifing, opening or pushing.

### Agility

Agility impacts the speed of walking and running and the speed of turning and sidestepping. Agility is also critical for avoiding physical and ranged weapon hits in combat. Certain climbing and balance world interactions may have a minimum agility requirement (rope bridges or rock cliffs).

### Dexterity

Dexterity impacts accuracy with weapons, both melee and ranged and the use of many tools. Thrown weapons are most sensative to Dexterity values, though all weapon attacks are impacted. 

Some tools may have a minimum dexterity requirement and the effectiveness of items created with that tool will always be impacted.

### Intelligence

Intelligence impacts the strength/effectiveness of offensive and utility spells and the quality of most crafting output. There is often a minimum intelligence requirement for crafting recipies or learning/casting spells.

### Wisdom

Wisdom impacts the amount of fatigue that using magic generates and increases the effectiveness of healing and protection magic. There is often a minimum wisdom requirement for enchanting items and performing summonings.

### Constitution

Constitution impacts resistances to disease, poison and magic effects and reduces the penalty for exceeding statistic tolerances. There is often a minimum constitution requirement for surviving in harsh environments without damage or withstanding encounters with diseased NPCs and mobs.

### Diplomacy

Diplomacy impacts NPC reactions and faction standing changes. Diplomacy can change on its own as the player interacts with NPCs, completing or failing their quest stages.

### Eloquence

Eloquence impacts NPC quest generation. A player with a high Eloquence may be required to fetch or kill fewer items, or be presented with a shorter sequence of required quests to complete. Some NPCs may have a minimum Eloquence requirement before they will offer their first quest.

### Cunning

Cunning impacts the ability to sneak, hide and cheat. The effectiveness of stealth skills is greatly influenced by cunning as well as steal, lock pick and disarm trap skills. Some spells and enchantments may have a minimum cunning requirement to use.

## Skills

Skills are learned and provide some combination of abilities and/or effects. All characters have an "Attack" skill to punch or swing a weapon, and an "Outfitter" skill to wear basic cloth and leather armors. Other skills can be learned from NPC traniners or gained by reading Skill Books.

Skills grant abilities or provide effects when learned. A skill may be an ability that can be activated, a static effect on the character or a combination of the two.

### Experience and Training

Characters gain experience which they can then spend to increase their skill values. Some training can be spent directly while other training requires spending time with an appropriate NPC trainer.

Experience is gained for most actions. Exploring new areas, meeting new NPCs, discovering Mobs and POIs, killing mobs, completing quests, using skills, etc., most everything generates some amount of experience, even if only a tiny amount. As experience is gained it can then be spent to improved character attributes and skills. Players can spend up to their currently gained experience to upgrade any time they are at rest (standing still, not in combat). Some skills, and advancing attributes beyond certain boundaries, requires the player to be interacting with an appropriate Trainer NPC. Some new skills may have a minimum earned XP requirement to learn them.

### Combat Skills

All characters have the Melee and Ranged skills and the Attack ability allowing them to deal damage with a fist or weapon. Other combat skills provide additional abilities or apply an effect to another attack or related parameter. Some combat skills are defensive in nature. All combat skills rely on melee or ranged attacks or other physical action. 

Many combat skills have progressively increasing fatigue costs for successive uses without a break.

### Magic Skills

Magic skills allow the player to cast certain kinds of spells. Each spell will be associated with one or more magic skills and some spells may have minimum skill requirements to learn/cast them.

The magic skills are:

 * **Abjuration:** Rejection or repulsion of an entity or effect
 * **Alteration:** Modifying (enhancing or reducing) an existing attribute of a target
 * **Conjuration:** Creating something physical from pure energy - often temporary or requiring concentration to maintain
 * **Divination:** Revealing, observing or knowing that which cannot otherwise be seen or known
 * **Evocation:** Emitting a force outward in a projectile, cone, sphere, or cloud
 * **Ministration:** Correcting imbalancce or repairing damage through mutual exchange
 * **Ordination:** Compelling something to happen through command of a greater power
 * **Translocation:** Changing the location of something without moving it through spacetime
 * **Transmutation:** Permanently changing the substance of something into something else
 * **Transtantiation:** Permanently changing the state of something without modifying what it is (e.g. enchanting, or with Ordination necromancy)

All magic requires the use of at least one skill and greater magics and stronger spells require more than one skill. The caster's skill level impacts the effectiveness of the spell as well as the fatigue cost.

### Support Skills

Some skills aid in navigating the world such as Tracking, Scavenging and Survival. Others such as Singing and Dancing may only have relevance if certain abilities have become available.

## Abilities

Abilities are actions a character can take and their effects are set by some related skill value. Characters may learn of an ability that requires a skill they don't yet have - this grants the new skill for advancement so that the ability can later be learned.

Some abilities are gained automatically with skill increases, while others can be learned from a book or NPC so long as the minimum skill requirement is met.

Abilities are assigned to the player's hotbars and represent the primary actions taken while playing the game. Abilities become more effective as their related skill levels are increased.

## Advancement Trees

A web of advancement trees will allow greater progression along specific selected paths. Many will be exclusive of others. Prior to starting into advancement trees, characters should feel like capable "jack of all trades" and already feel a bit of class specialization happening just based on equipment choices and play style. Advancement trees are where the real feel of being a particular class can be achieved, at the cost of advanced power in non-class-related aspects of character development.

The specifics of these trees will be determined as the game is developed.

